[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>I first saw "A
Course in Miracles"
on someone's coffee
table in I suppose
1977, something like that.
And I read the introduction.
And the introduction is a
kind of astonishing thing.
I have it here.
The introduction says, "This
is a course in miracles.
It is a required course.
Only the time you
take it is voluntary.
Free will does not mean that you
can establish the curriculum.
It means only that
you can elect what
you want to take
at a given time.
The course does not aim at
teaching the meaning of love,
for that is beyond
what can be taught.
It does aim, however,
at removing the blocks
to the awareness of
love's presence, which
is your natural inheritance.
The opposite of love
is fear, but what
is all-encompassing
can have no opposite.
This course can therefore
be summed up very
simply in this way.
Nothing real can be threatened.
Nothing unreal exists.
Herein lies the peace of God."
I saw that, I read
it, and I thought
that was the most
amazing piece of writing.
To pick up a book and
have the book tell you
it's a required course.
You go, who was it?
What is it?
Who is telling me that this
book is a required course?
I was so intrigued by that.
>>I read one page.
And that one page of reading,
and I heard for the first time,
a little inner voice had
said, physician, heal thyself.
This is your way home.
And I had the most
amazing experience
of feeling a sense of
oneness with the whole world,
that there was
absolutely no separation,
that there was only love.
And a real feeling that I
was to be of service to God.
My whole life would
be changed, and it
would be a life of giving and
a life of being of service.
I couldn't understand
that, but it
was a very deep,
penetrating feeling.
And I became a student of the
course, fought it all the way.
Couldn't deal with the thickness
of the course, let alone
its Christian terminology.
And yet there's something
about the course
that just compelled me to go on.
>>The spiritual genesis of
the international bestseller
"A Course in Miracles" is both
extraordinary and inspiring.
The self study three book course
was dictated by an inner voice,
and it has profoundly changed
the lives of countless people
the world over.
Spread mainly by word
of mouth, its principles
have thus far been known
only to its students.
But now its
transformational teachings
of love, forgiveness,
inner peace and wisdom
will be explored.
Communicating the correct
meaning of the course
rests largely with Dr.
Kenneth Wapnick, president
of the Foundation for
"A Course in Miracles."
In a recent
television interview,
he gave an enlightening
overview of the course.
>>It's a form of
spiritual psychotherapy
that comes to us in
a Christian context.
As you mentioned at the
beginning, its author is Jesus.
But it's a Christianity
that has practically nothing
to do with the traditional
teachings of 2,000 years.
It certainly has nothing to do
with the Jesus of the Bible.
Its principal message
is forgiveness,
and that the way that we
remember our identity as God's
children and realize that
in his eyes we are all one
is to forgive each other.
It basically is a self-study
course in the sense
that you don't need
anyone outside.
The teacher, or the
guru, as it were,
would be Jesus or
the Holy Spirit,
who guides us day by day.
Our lives in this world are
seen as a classroom basically,
in which we learn
the Holy Spirit's
lessons of forgiveness.
And again, as I
mentioned, it's by undoing
all of the feelings
of inadequacy,
our feelings of
guilt, our anxieties,
which is what
forgiveness brings about,
that the love of God, which
is present in all of us,
is allowed to be remembered.
>>There is a massive effort
going on in this society,
and I think
throughout the world,
to retrieve some lost
part of ourselves.
And "A Course in Miracles"
is part of that effort.
>>"A Course in Miracles"
contains a whole philosophy
for living in our times.
The "Course" was born when an
inner voice spoke to Dr. Helen
Schucman in 1965 while she was
working at Columbia University.
Helen was a highly respected
research psychologist
and associate professor
who worked with Dr. William
Thetford, a professor
of medical psychology
at the prestigious
Columbia University's
College of Physicians
and Surgeons.
In her unpublished
autobiography,
Helen, who died on
February 9, 1981,
described her reactions to her
job and the highly stressful
situations that existed there.
>>I was a
psychologist, educated,
conservative in theory
and atheistic in belief.
I was working in a prestigious
and highly academic setting,
and the job was
ghastly at first.
The hospital didn't provide
space for our projects,
and when we were finally housed
in the new research building,
it was the most
difficult situation
of my professional life.
The work was oppressive
and carried out
in an atmosphere of suspicion
and competitiveness,
and interpersonal harmony
was depressingly lacking.
Then something
happened that triggered
a chain of events I could
never have predicted.
>>We had worked together
for a number of years
actually, from 1958
until the summer of 1965,
with a good deal of
improvement in terms
of the organization
of the psychology
department at the hospital.
But we weren't really at peace.
And one day, I gave
Helen a little speech.
This was in June of 1965 before
we were going to a meeting.
Essentially, what
I said is, there
must be a better way of living
and working in the world,
of handling our personal and
professional relationships
and problems, and I'm
determined to find it.
This was kind of a
long speech for me,
and I remember feeling
at the end of this
that Helen probably
was going to laugh.
But to my amazement,
quite the contrary.
She said, you're
absolutely right, Bill.
We'll find this
other way together.
And that was the beginning
of a joint commitment,
which the two of us made.
The summer of 1965 was
an extraordinary summer
for both Helen and me
in a number of ways.
Helen began to have
a great deal of what
you might call heightened visual
imagery, or dream sequences.
She began to experience this
with considerable clarity.
And I suggested that she
write down these experiences
as they occurred because
they seem to have something--
they were saying
something very important,
even though we didn't know
exactly what that was.
One of those sequences
involved being in a boat.
>>The boat was moving
slowly but easily
along a very straight
little canal.
There was just enough breeze
to help the boat along.
I wonder if there is
buried treasure here,
I thought to myself dreamily.
I shouldn't be
surprised if there were.
Then I noticed a long
pole with a large hook
on the end lying on
the bottom of the boat.
Just the thing, I
thought, dropping the hook
into the water and reaching the
pole down as far as I could.
The hook caught something
heavy, and I raised it
with difficulty.
It was an ancient
treasure chest,
the wood worn from the
water, and the bottom
covered with seaweed.
There was nothing in the
chest but a large black book,
like the spring binders used for
holding manuscripts or papers
together.
On the spine, one word
was written in gold.
The word was Aesculapius.
The word was familiar,
but I could not
remember what it meant.
When I looked it
up, I found that it
was the name of the
Greek god of healing.
I saw the same book once
more a few nights later.
This time, there was a
string of pearls around it.
This psychic phase
ended abruptly
with a particularly
clear picture episode
in which I knew I had made
an irrevocable choice.
I saw myself entering a cave
cut into a rock formation
on a bleak, windswept sea coast.
What I found in the cave
was a large and very old
parchment scroll.
Its ends were attached to
heavy gold-tipped poles,
and the scroll was
wrapped around them
so that they met in the
middle of the scroll
and were tied tightly together.
I managed to untie the ends
and open the scroll just enough
to reveal the center panel, on
which two words were written,
God is.
Then I unrolled the scroll
all the way, and as I did so,
tiny letters began to appear
on both sides of the panel.
The silent voice which
I had heard before
explained the situation
mentally to me.
If you look at
the left side, you
will be able to read the
past, said the voice.
If you look at the
right side, you
will be able to read the future.
But I hesitated only a
moment before rolling up
the scroll sufficiently
to conceal everything
except the center panel.
I am not interested in reading
the past or the future,
I said with finality.
I will just stop with this.
The voice sounded both
reassured and reassuring.
You made it that time, it said.
Thank you.
And that, it seemed, was that.
>>Helen prided herself as a
research psychologist, not as
someone who heard voices,
who had heightened
visual imagery,
who experienced all
of these psychic
events that occurred
throughout the summer of '65.
It was extremely
distressing to her.
She kept feeling that maybe
she was losing her mind.
Certainly she couldn't
reconcile all of this activity
with her scientific
predilections.
And this became a particularly
acute problem for her
as the summer and
early fall began.
One night she called me, and
this was in October, and said,
you know that inner
voice refuses to go away.
It keeps saying, this
is a course in miracles.
Please take notes.
What shall I do?
Suppose it's crazy.
Suppose it doesn't
make any sense.
Suppose it's flipped.
And she was obviously
going through a great deal
of anguish and
agony at that point.
I said the only obvious thing.
Why don't you take
down whatever it is?
You can read it to me tomorrow
morning in the office,
and if it doesn't
make any sense,
no one else ever has
to know about it.
But at least we'll
know what it is.
So that's what we did.
The next morning, Helen came in.
And as she read that
beautiful introduction
to the text, which says
nothing real can be threatened.
Nothing unreal exists.
Herein lies the peace of God.
It was obvious that we
were tuning into something
that could hardly be
regarded as crazy, no matter
how unexpected it was.
>>A major contribution
of miracles
is their strength
in releasing you
from your false sense of
isolation, deprivation,
and lack.
A miracle is never lost.
It may touch many people
you have not even met
and produce undreamed
of changes in situations
of which you are not even aware.
Miracles are natural
signs of forgiveness.
Through miracles, you
accept God's forgiveness
by extending it to others.
I would feel the writing coming
on almost daily, and sometimes
several times a day.
Evenings turned out to be a
favorite time for dictation.
I objected bitterly to
this, and often went to bed
defiantly without
writing anything.
But I could not sleep.
Eventually, I got up in some
disgust and wrote as directed.
I never knew when I started
a sentence how it would end,
and the ideas came
so quickly that I
had trouble keeping
up with them.
>>Helen could turn it
on or off at any time.
She could stop in the
middle of a sentence
without even going back to
reread what she had written
and continue when
she had a moment.
She could have a research
conference in mid-sentence.
It made no difference at all.
The flow of the
material continued
without any altered state.
Helen at no time was
in a trance or anything
remotely resembling a trance.
But as I read the material, I
recognized that Helen in no way
could have written
this material.
It was totally alien to her
background, to her interests,
and her mode of
conceptualizing abstract ideas,
that there's no way
she could've done this.
>>Where did the
writing come from?
I did not understand the
calm but impressive authority
with which the voice dictated.
It is largely because of the
strangely compelling nature
of this authority that I
have referred to the voice
with a capital V. At several
points in the writing,
the voice itself speaks
in no uncertain terms
about the author, Jesus.
My own reactions to
these references,
which literally
stunned me at the time,
have decreased in
intensity and are now
at a level of wonder
and acceptance.
The name of Jesus Christ
as such is but a symbol,
but it stands for love
that is not of this world.
This course comes from
him because his words
have reached you in a language
you can love and understand.
The name of Jesus is the
name of one who was a man,
but saw the face of
Christ in all his brothers
and remembered God.
Is He the Christ?
Oh, yes, along with you.
>>The first part of the
material that we worked on
lasted for almost three
years and ended up
as a 622-page volume.
When the text was finished,
Helen felt, as I did,
that that was the completion
of our assignment,
and that we had plenty
to do to simply try
to learn those concepts and
apply them in our lives.
However, after a period
of perhaps nine months,
Helen got increasingly restless.
Then one day, she
began to take down
the "Workbook for Students,"
which consists of 365 lessons,
one for each day of the year.
And that was the beginning of
the second part of the course.
That took approximately
2 and 1/2 years,
and at the end of that, we again
thought that we were finished.
And after a number
of months, again,
of not being quite sure
what would happen next,
the third and final
volume was announced
as the "Manual for Teachers."
So the total period of time
was approximately seven years
from the time we began with the
text, including the workbook,
and finally the
manual for teachers.
>>I first met Helen and
Bill in the fall of '72,
and then I saw the "Course" for
the first time in May of '73.
Then after, we spent a
great deal of time together.
And I think what impressed
me first about Helen and Bill
was despite all the
conflict that they
had with each other and the
difficulties with the course
or resistances to the
course, that there's
underlying commitment that they
both had made, to see to it
that the purity of the
course and its message
would never be changed, and
would always remain pure.
And I think that that always
was extremely impressive to me.
Helen and I spent a great
deal of time together.
We had dinner almost every
night, she, her husband Louie,
and myself.
And we spent a great deal of
time going over the manuscript,
making sure that its
published form would
be exactly the way
Jesus wanted it.
And Helen herself was
an extraordinary woman.
She would go from moments of
real kind of other worldliness,
where her whole
face would change.
And she would tell me afterwards
that in those moments,
she was like beyond even
Jesus, beyond the relationship
with Him, beyond
hearing His voice.
It was like being
in the presence
almost of an ageless,
timeless wisdom.
And then within seconds,
she'd go right back down,
worrying about where
her husband was,
how come he was
late for supper, and
concerned about
all mundane things.
>>I was teaching at New
York University in 1975
and feeling full up
with an exciting career
in what we then called
experimental parapsychology,
or consciousness
research, meeting
very interesting people,
traveling, speaking.
And I was feeling a
sort of emptiness.
I didn't know why.
One night I locked myself
in the bathroom in my home,
and I went to pieces.
I could say it was
a form of surrender.
I called out from the
bottom of my heart,
won't someone up
there please help me?
And I meant it.
Within a very short
time, I received the help
I sought, but not in
the form I anticipated.
A few days after, I was
asked by a good friend
to accompany him to
meet two professors
of medical psychology
at Columbia University
School of Physicians
and Surgeons.
I went with him, not
knowing what to expect
or why the meeting.
But it seemed as if
I was supposed to go.
And that kind of mood
continued as Bill took us
inside the university,
where we had lunch with Bill
and his associate,
Helen Schucman.
I found her to be a very
clever woman, very intellectual
and well spoken, quite
articulate, and a bit sharp.
And I was intimidated.
And the conversation was going
in all different directions.
And a little bit bemused, I
found myself turning to Helen
and saying to her, you're
hearing an inner voice,
aren't you?
And I didn't really
know what I meant.
But she seemed quite startled.
And she said, I beg your pardon.
And Bill tried to
soothe the situation.
He said, well, Helen, let's
go back to our office,
and let's talk about
this in private.
And the two of them took
me back to their office
and closed the door.
And she handed me the text
with its introduction.
And I took it from her,
and I put it on my lap,
as the others were
talking among themselves.
And I looked down at it.
I opened up the black binder.
And I turned to
the introduction,
and I read, "This is
a course in miracles.
It's a required course."
And there was no
question in my mind
that I was being
given a miracle,
and that I'd asked for it.
>>In New York,
Judith Skutch-Whitson
spent a great deal of
time with Helen Schucman,
and she quickly recognized
the profound importance
of the course.
This became a turning
point in Judith's life,
and she soon helped establish
the nonprofit Foundation
for Inner Peace and found a
way to publish the course.
>>Tolerance for
pain may be high,
but it is not without limit.
Eventually, everyone begins
to recognize, however dimly,
that there must be a better way.
As this recognition becomes
more firmly established,
it becomes a turning point.
This ultimately reawakens
spiritual vision.
>>I can't even imagine
what my life would
have been if I had not found
"A Course in Miracles."
When I first picked
it up at my apartment,
I started reading
it voraciously.
Then it was really time for me.
And I felt, as so
many people have said,
that I had come home.
What I didn't have that
"A Course in Miracles"
gave me is a deep
sense that faith in God
is inseparable from
faith in other people.
And that's what it
means to me in my life.
It is a continuous
reminder that my temptation
to find guilt in my brother
is an attack on myself.
That was what so moved
me the first day I ever
read a page of the
"Course in Miracles,"
and it's the message
that most moves me today.
>>Trials are but lessons
that you failed to learn,
presented once again.
So where you made a
faulty choice before,
you now can make a
better one, and thus
escape all pain
that what you chose
before has brought to you.
In every difficulty, all
distress and each perplexity,
Christ calls to you and gently
says, my brother, choose again.
>>As an actor, I've played
many roles in my career.
But in my life, I've only
played one, which is the victim.
I'm always victimized
by something or someone.
So I decided to look for a
way out and an explanation
to all this.
I picked up about every
possible path and technique
from the spiritual supermarket,
and nothing worked.
So six years ago, the "Course"
was translated into Spanish,
and I picked it up and
started a little bit.
And I knew there
was something there.
The "Course" would teach me that
victimization feelings are not
a fact, but an interpretation
you are putting to them.
But what is more important,
it would teach me
how the presence of love
within me I can call for help.
Which I did, and
nowadays I experience
a very strong presence
of love next to me.
Whenever I feel victimized
by something or someone,
I can call for help.
And He teaches me it's
not an attack, but just
the silly things we do to
each other when we are afraid.
We are all afraid.
And that has changed my
life because now, I'm
not desperate or
alone anymore, and I
feel a deep sense of peace that
nothing ever gave me before.
>>All my life, I've
always felt a sense
of emptiness and alienation.
And I never really understood
it because I've always
been somewhat successful
in terms of the world.
And I tried to fill up
this sense of emptiness
through causes, through civil
rights, and the peace movement.
I lived in Africa in the
Peace Corps for two years.
And then I got a Ph.D., and I
traveled all over the world.
And each one of
these experiences
actually was a disappointment
because it just
didn't do what I thought
it would do for me.
About nine years ago, I was
working with people with AIDS,
and I loved the work.
It was very challenging
and intense.
But one day I began to realize
that I couldn't continue
giving hope to my clients
because I felt hopeless myself.
And I just said, there
must be a better way.
Soon after that, I found
the "Course in Miracles,"
and it wasn't at all what
I thought it would be.
But it really
taught me that I do
have an inner teacher
inside me, and I
don't have to go to things
outside to fill that need
and that emptiness.
I don't have to use
people to meet my needs.
I've also seen
that relationships
with people in my
family and my friends
and my whole purpose toward
work, which as a university
professor has changed
because all of these
are used as a classroom to
get closer to the love of God.
I think that the most important
thing the "Course" has taught
me is that I no longer have
a sense of hopelessness.
>>I see, in my own life,
a tremendous growth,
especially over
the last few years
since I've been studying
"A Course in Miracles."
That I've come to
a point that I am
at least able to see the
baggage I'm dragging behind me,
and realizing that it's
my choice to release that.
And that in releasing
those illusions-- and they
are illusions, because
the past is over.
It can touch us not.
And the future is not-- nothing
exists but the present now,
this wholly instant now.
And once one gets that, there's
just a tremendous power.
Because you are defenseless.
There is no need to feel
vulnerable to the world
that you're joined with.
And it's a wonderful
healing process,
and I think when we
mirror that to each other,
it's nonstoppable.
>>Part of my work as a
clinician in this county
was consulting with
oncologists with children
who had very serious
illness and were dying.
And I noted that many
of these children
oftentimes asked the
doctor or nurse--
this is way back now in
1975-- about their thoughts
about dying, and their
fears about dying.
And oftentimes the
nurse and the doctor
would just change the subject.
And it occurred
to me, there need
to be a place where
kids can really
talk and have an
honest reaction.
Because oftentimes,
those same kids
would find the person
who is the most
honest was the woman who
was scrubbing the floor.
And she'd give an
honest response.
And I gave a lecture
back in New York
on the prevention of
cancer and talking
about some of the things I was
doing on a one-to-one basis,
maybe utilizing
"Course" principles.
And what occurred
to me was I was
to start-- it was
in my meditation
on the plane coming
back-- I was to start
a center that would make use
of the "Course" principles
and allow me to look
at death differently.
And really, the
children would teach me
these spiritual principles.
And I was just to be the
catalyst for setting it up.
And I set it up really based
on the course principle.
Not saying to children,
look, I have a better way
of dealing with this
than someone else,
but I'd like your help.
Can we be colleagues
with each other
about a different way
of looking at the world?
And maybe it would be
possible, if you got together
with other children
and could talk
with them about
their problems, you
could end up helping
each other far better
than doctors and
nurses and teachers.
And so we started in that way.
The name Center for
Attitudinal Healing
actually makes use of
many of the principles
of the "Course of Miracles."
Because what is
attitudinal healing,
except letting go of the
negative thoughts of fear
and anger and attack
thoughts, and having them
being replaced with love
that's always been there.
So this is what, really,
attitudinal healing's all
about.
I began going around talking
about love and God, some things
that we don't talk
about in medical school.
But the majority
of doctors, they
became very skeptical, very
concerned, very wondrous.
But what happened was that the
families that we were seeing,
children who had catastrophic
illness, that there
was such rapid shifts
in their feelings.
Their whole family structure
had changed so rapidly
that these very physicians
that were very skeptical
began to refer people to us.
And one of the things that
has been helpful for me
is a quote from the "Course."
It says, "I'm not a body.
I'm free, for I am
still as God created me.
The peace of God is
everything that I want.
my one goal, the aim
of all my living
here, the end I seek.
My purpose, my
function, and my life,
while I abide where
I'm not at home."
And children at the Center have
really been greatly helpful
to me at taking another
look at the body
and seeing the difference
between life and death.
One child, who had sickle
cell anemia, named Kerry,
I was asking him about what
he thought about death.
He'd come close to
death many times.
He said, well,
Jerry, I think what
happens when you die is that God
has really created a library,
and you're a book
in His library.
And what He does is he loans
this book to your parents,
and it's on a loan basis.
And when the due
date is up, that book
comes back into God's heart.
So you're never really
separate from God,
and when your
time's up, you just
go home to the heart of God.
And I thought, wow, what a
beautiful way of looking at it.
>>I came to UC
Berkley around 1967
in its very turbulent
years at the school,
a lot of racial strife.
And around 1968, '69,
I took a lot of courses
in sociology, psychology,
political science.
And every-- the theme in all
of them was blacks were poor.
Blacks were deprived.
Blacks were the
wretched of society.
I began to look at
life, the society,
with anger and frustration.
And around that same
time, there was a group
of people who called
themselves the Nation of Islam.
And it basically
taught black supremacy.
And I lived this doctrine.
I ate it.
I slept it.
I didn't really socialize
with whites for seven years.
So I went over to JFK, and I was
like, this is the very first--
I hadn't been on a campus
or in a white environment
for seven years.
There was a lady there
named Judy Skutch,
and she was introducing
a set of books
titled "A Course in Miracles."
And when Judy read
this introduction,
I had this experience
that I hadn't
experienced since I was a child.
I was one with
everything in the room.
I felt totally at peace.
And something deep inside of
me said, this a tool for you.
Use it.
>>When I first read in
"A Course in Miracles,"
the ideas that our home
is in God's presence,
that we are spirit
and not the body,
that we have been created as one
with each other and our source,
I just knew it was true.
I'd had the experience.
I didn't need validation of the
experience to know it was true.
But I did need an intellectual
system to help me apply it.
And that's what I first
noticed about the course,
that I could start
with a lesson a day
to start to unlearn
the mistakes that
had been programmed
into my mind.
That I could remember
more clearly that indeed
I am spirit.
And in that sense, I'm
at home and totally safe.
I don't have to go any
place to find safety.
I don't have to be
anyone different.
I just have to
remember who I am.
>>That's an outside change.
What's inside began to change.
I began to see the
love that was there
between-- from human to human.
I began to experience that.
I began to get new friends who
were not-- that didn't just
look like me, who were
white, who were Hispanic.
Color became-- was not an
issue in my relationships.
I began to see that all
men are created equal.
And unless we see that, we're
not going to experience peace.
I began to see that--
anytime I see myself
as being above
another human being
or below another
human being, I'm
not going to experience peace.
>>Two of my favorite quotes
from the course are two lessons.
Number 134, which is if I
defend myself, I'm attacked,
and the other is 185 or
285, which is my mind
can change all
thoughts that hurt.
These I have found a
tremendous practical value
in going through life.
And I've also found that, in
dealing with other people,
and especially when we go
into the prisons and deal
with people who are in prison,
that these two lessons are
very pragmatic, very
practical, and are
of tremendous value
to those people who
have found themselves
in that situation.
>>The "Course" started letting
me get peace, letting me relax.
And I started experimenting
with the lessons
that I was picking up and
trying them out on people.
And I started getting
real warmth and closeness
and in touch with people.
When they hurt, I hurt.
Not out of sympathy,
but out of empathy.
I could understand more
clearly, having experienced
the pain and the degradations
and the things that
go on in prison.
And not pointing fingers
that that's their fault.
They did that to me.
Society did that to me.
The jury did that to me.
The judge did that to me.
I was real clear now
that I did that to me.
I allowed myself to
become unconnected.
I allowed myself to be unloving
and unavailable and resentful
and bitter and things like that.
And once I got that, then
it was real clear that it
was OK to tell somebody that,
you know what, I love you.
And be in prison
at the same time.
>>What the "Course"
does for a lot of people
is to get them to
know, recognize,
almost instantly, that
they are not acting the way
they want to, and they
can change their minds
because they are aware of that.
And that is as much
of a help as anything.
Because it stops you
from going in a direction
that you inherently
really don't want to do.
You don't want to be conflicted.
Nobody wants to be conflicted.
They want to be loving,
and they want to love.
It stops you from
being conflicted,
which is what it does to
an awful lot of people
who study this course.
>>A lot of the "Course"
is about living
in the world in a different way.
Also, a lot of it's about guilt.
Two of the things,
obviously, that
cause the greatest degree
of guilt in all of us
here are sex and money.
And while the "Course"
takes positions on nothing--
the "Course" is not
a system of behavior.
The "Course" is a
system in mind changing.
Really, I think, what it has
taught me regarding those two
subjects, is that sex and money
are neutral things in which I
invest my meaning.
Like everything else
in the world, the body,
the world itself, sex, money,
whatever else it would happen
to be, each thing only has the
meaning that my mind gives it.
If I make sex a very
important thing to me,
and make it something
that I need,
I'm giving power to sex
that sex doesn't have.
If I make money something
very important to me,
which I did for a good
portion of my life,
then I make money something
that it really isn't.
And I think the easiest
way to say it is this.
The "Course in Miracles" teaches
you to live in the moment.
In order to live
in the moment, you
have to do a couple of things.
You must forgive so
that you can trust.
You must have no
defense so you don't
feel that you're
going to be attacked.
But assuming that you can
go through the sequence
of no defenses,
forgiveness of your brother
for what he didn't do
to you, and then trust,
and you can live
in the moment, then
all those things
become meaningless.
Money becomes meaningless
because living in the moment
is the whole point.
Money is a
future-oriented thing.
Sex becomes something that
you do or you don't do.
If it's there and you
should do it, you do it.
If it's not there, and you
don't do it, you don't do it.
It doesn't become
something that's
more important
than it should be.
And unfortunately for us way
back for the story of Genesis
on through the
world, sex has become
something that's almost
like the serpent.
We should hate the serpent.
We should hate sex.
We should feel guilty
when we have sex.
We should feel guilty if
we have too much money.
we have too little money.
That's kind of absurd.
So I think what the
"Course" taught me to do
is to take one step back from
those emotion-ridden things
and recognize that the emotion
that's in there I put in there,
and I can subtract it out.
And then in doing so, I
can see it in balance.
And I think if there's anything
that the course would teach us
over a long period of time
is to become in balance.
>>I encountered "A
Course in Miracles"
at a very critical
time in my life,
when I was Chief of the Foreign
Affairs and National Defense
Division of the
Library of Congress,
and had 150 professional
men and women
working for me and
for the Congress
to clarify major issues
of defense policy
and foreign policy.
And it was a very rich and full
life, a very useful career,
you might say, as far
as informing congress
about different ways of looking
at foreign defense policy
issues.
But unfortunately,
at precisely the time
when, from an outsider's
perception of me,
my life seemed to
be most useful,
it had the least meaning.
Several quotations
became my guide.
And I guess, in a
sense, the one that
was most startling for me
was the quotation, do not
seek to change the world.
Instead, change
your mind about it.
Now, given the fact that my
entire professional life had
been dedicated to leaving
the world a better place,
in effect changing some of
the things that I thought
were wrong with the world, and
my technique for doing that
was to try to understand
economics, politics, strategy,
psychology, sociology,
the Chinese language.
I had a great deal
of education that
aimed at being more useful.
Yet, as time went on,
I became very clear
that, as they say in Washington,
where I stand on an issue
depends on where I sit.
So when I read this first
quote in the "Course,"
it was something, that as
people say in California,
really resonated with me.
It sounded true.
>>The journey to God is
merely the reawakening
of the knowledge of
where you are always,
and what you are forever.
It is a journey without
distance to a goal
that has never changed.
You dwell not here,
but in eternity.
You travel but in dreams
while safe at home.
>>I think it is the vision
of universal innocence
that makes the
"Course in Miracles"
attract so many people.
That's not an easy
spirituality, by the way.
It's not an easy
spirituality at all.
It merely is a message that
until and unless we are willing
to see the innocence in
others and ourselves,
we cannot experience
the peace of God.
The "Course in Miracles"
says that heaven is not
a condition or place, but
an awareness of our oneness.
And we are one in our innocence.
Obviously, the way that we err,
the ways that we make mistakes,
are different.
Your mistakes are
different than my mistakes.
But your innocence is
the same as my innocence.
>>You have but two
emotions, love and fear.
One you made, and
one was given you.
Each is a way of seeing,
and different worlds
arise from their
different sights.
See the love of God in you,
and you will see it everywhere
because it is everywhere.
With love in you, you have
no need except to extend it.
>>The "Course" is predicated
on two belief systems.
One is real.
The other is false.
The false belief system
is one the ego adheres to.
And that is that we're born into
this world in physical bodies
in a world that is real,
the physical, and things
happen to us, and sometimes
we experience happiness, once
in a while joy, very often
depression and anxiety,
certainly disease,
and always death.
And that's the system of
thought that the ego loves,
the ego adheres
to, the ego exults,
and the ego wants
us to believe in.
On the other hand,
there's a belief system
that God is our reality, we
are created in God's image
as spirit, not
the physical body,
that we are love, that a
property of love is light,
and that we are eternal.
We cannot be hurt.
We're inviolate.
We can't be destroyed.
When one puts it that way,
who but an insane person
would want to choose the ego?
>>One of the things I've learned
from working with clients
in psychotherapy
is that they tend
to get better when they
take responsibility
for their experience.
And the "Course" speaks
to this very directly.
It says simply, I am
responsible for what I see.
I choose the feelings
that I experience,
and I decide upon the
goal I would achieve.
And everything that
seems to happen to me I
ask for and receive
as I have asked.
Now, that's quite a
challenge, if we're
going to accept
that at face value.
But in fact, it gives
us a sense of direction.
It points out to us that we
need to take responsibility
for the feelings we have
and that if I'm angry,
at some level, that's a choice.
It may be out of defensiveness.
It may be out of fear.
But that basically, I
can choose whether I
want to release that anger, to
work it through and move on,
or whether I want to remain
stuck in it, so to speak.
And I think that's
sometimes a problem.
Because in
psychotherapy, we often
emphasize the importance
of expressing anger,
but we forget that
that's not an endpoint.
When a person feels
like a victim,
it's maybe very appropriate
for them to get angry about it.
But it's also appropriate
for them to release that
and to move on.
So that in order to get in
touch with our creativity,
to be truly creative rather
than reactive in our lives,
we need to get beyond
the position of victim
and the position of adversary
and angry reactivity
into a more creative view of
what's possible in our lives.
>>You may believe that you are
responsible for what you do,
but not for what you think.
The truth is that you are
responsible for what you think,
because it is only at this level
that you can exercise choice.
What you do comes
from what you think.
Do not try to look beyond
yourself for truth,
for truth can only
be within you.
>>My interest in the
"Course of Miracles"
began some years ago
when I was doing research
at the University of
California on meditation
and different
schools of religion.
And someone showed me
a copy of the "Course,"
and I reacted with
great skepticism
and refused to look at
it for a couple of years.
Until when I finally did,
I was quite surprised
and surprisingly impressed,
particularly by two things.
One was that I found there was a
psychological system within it,
which was very sophisticated
and on a par, in many ways,
with some contemporary
thinking in Western psychology.
And the second thing that
surprised and impressed me
was that it became
clear that this seemed
to represent an example of the
underlying perennial wisdom,
which seems to lie at the core
of the world's great religions.
>>The course was
intended for self-study,
and it has been translated
into many languages
by the foundation.
But it is here, in
Roscoe, New York,
at the Foundation for
A Course in Miracles,
that co-founders Kenneth
and Gloria Wapnick
offer classes for
students who desire
to pursue the "Course" in depth.
>>It's called "A
Course in Miracles"
because it's the miracle that
is the central process whereby
our minds are healed.
The "Course" teaches
us that the problem
is that we've forgotten
that we even have a mind.
And so there's like
a veil of amnesia,
which has fallen across us.
And we live in this
world, living our lives,
as Thoreau said, in
quiet desperation,
never really knowing
what the problem is.
So we live lives of pain, of
suffering, of love and hate,
of ups and downs.
But never knowing that the
source of all of our problems
lies in a choice that
our mind has made.
And what the "Miracle"
does is restore to our mind
the awareness that
we do have a mind,
and that within this mind
is a power of choice.
So where before we
have chosen the ego
thought system of attack
and guilt and fear,
now we can choose the thought
system of the Holy Spirit
and learn how to
forgive and how to love.
The central concept of "A Course
in Miracles" is forgiveness.
And there's a beautiful
line which really summarizes
this that says the holiest
spot on all the Earth
is when ancient hatred
has become a present love,
that thee holiest spot
on Earth is not a place.
It's not a church.
It is not a shrine.
It's the altar within our
minds when we choose, finally,
to forgive somebody
against whom we've
held a terrible grievance.
And by asking Jesus
for help, we're
able to shift the way
that we see this person.
And so instead of his
becoming an ancient enemy,
he now suddenly becomes
our friend and our brother
and our companion back home.
>>I think the "Course"
is so important
because it has a different
type of spirituality
than other paths
because you don't
have to leave the
world or your situation
or your family or your job.
You can stay right put where you
are and practice the "Course."
You don't have to
go off to a mountain
or an ashram or a monastery.
Because the main teaching of
the "Course" is forgiveness.
And so you practice these
lessons of forgiveness
as you go along with
the "Course" day by day,
minute by minute, in your life,
in your job, in your family.
And you have, as the
"Course" teaches us,
a right mind, where
there is a correction
for each wrong-minded thought
of the ego thought system.
And so as I'm going
through my day,
and I feel myself
getting upset and angry,
I have an internal teacher
that the "Course" says
is either Jesus or the Holy
Spirit, and I can ask for help.
And in that instant, I
can shift my perception--
and that's what the
"Course" calls a miracle--
and I can have that anger
changed to a new perception
and let it go
through this process
that the "Course"
calls forgiveness.
>>When I started to read
"A Course in Miracles"
and recognize that to
forgive is to overlook,
that selective
remembering helped
in the process of forgiveness.
To choose only the
thoughts of love
and forget those of aggression,
fear, denial, anger.
That in that attitude, based
upon a spiritual concept
that we are not our bodies,
but we are, in truth, spirit.
At that point, I
could understand
what the "Course" meant
when it said to forgive
is not to condone.
It's not to make
error real, but rather
to recognize that what you
thought someone has done to you
has never in truth occurred.
Has never in truth occurred
was so startling to me.
Because of course it occurs.
We see it every day.
We experience it every moment.
But in truth, it's saying,
in the metaphysical reality,
in the spiritual truth, in God's
world, it has not occurred.
Only by shifting our thought
from the ego's thought system
to that of God can we dare
to accomplish forgiveness.
That's the bad news.
The good news is we have a
friend, the voice within us,
the eternal forgiver, the
higher guide, the higher self,
anything we choose to call it.
And it's that, that
great transformer within,
that helps in the
process of forgiving.
So it became then
very, very specific,
the guidelines I was
given for forgiveness.
Number one, recognize
I had a problem,
that I wasn't feeling peaceful,
and that I was holding
a negative feeling
about someone.
Recognize it.
Bring it to the surface.
Confront it.
All within myself, of course.
And the second, recognize
that I wanted peace,
that I really wanted
to see it differently,
that I wanted to change my mind.
I didn't want to hold this
grudge, this grievance,
any longer.
Number three, know that I
couldn't accomplish this
by myself.
Meaning, my small
self, my ego self.
Number four, turn it
over to the higher self.
Say, take this mess.
I can't handle it.
I really surrender it to you.
I ask you to take it from me and
to show me what true vision is.
Now, when that happens,
one can be sure
that the situation
is transformed,
that one does see
with different eyes.
I call it realize.
I begin to realize what that
other human being is to me.
More than a brother or a
sister, more than a friend,
that person is myself.
In that sense, I am not
my brother's keeper.
I am that other.
No one can do
anything to one's self
when one is looking at the
world through one's higher self.
And that becomes a system of
such safety and protection
that it has great dividends.
>>The "Course" has
a very unusual way
of defining
forgiveness, and that
is that you forgive your brother
for what he has not done,
not for what he
has done, which is
the usual way of
looking at forgiveness.
And what that means on
one very important level
is that what I accuse you
of, what I hold against you,
is that it's because of you
that I no longer experience
the love or the peace of God.
That before you
came into my life,
or before you said or did this
awful thing, I felt wonderful.
Now all of a sudden, my life has
crumbled, and it's your fault.
What the course helps us to
understand, on the other hand,
is that there's no one and
nothing in this world that
has the power to take
God's peace away from me,
except my own mind
if I choose to see
myself as separate from it.
And so therefore,
what I forgive you for
is that you have not taken
the peace of God away from me.
Instead, what I have to
do is to forgive myself
because it was my mistaken
choice that caused me
all the pain and not
something you have done.
And what allows us to do
this is the role of Jesus
or the Holy Spirit, that
basically what Jesus says to us
in our minds is take
my hand, use my eyes,
and look at your brother
the way that I see him.
And then you'll see that
this person is just like you.
He shares the same
insanity you do.
He's part of the
same faulty thought
system that you are part
of, and that he also
yearns as you do to return home.
And so rather than seeing
my brother or my sister
as separate and
different from me,
I see them as people
walking along the same road
back to heaven as I am.
And it's the love of
Jesus which really
helps us make that shift.
>>What could you want
forgiveness cannot give?
Do you want peace?
Forgiveness offers it.
Do you want happiness, a quiet
mind, a certainty of purpose,
and a sense of worth and beauty
that transcends the world?
Do you want care and safety and
the warmth of sure protection
always?
All of this
forgiveness offers you.
Forgive the world, and you will
understand that everything that
God created cannot have an end.
And nothing he did
not create is real.
In this one sentence is
our course explained.
>>There certainly does appear to
be a spiritual awakening going
on in our age.
Certainly, if you contrast the
'90s with the '40s and '50s
when I grew up, things are
certainly much different.
God is no longer a dirty word.
Angels are spoken about freely.
Miracles are talked about.
And I certainly feel
that the "Course"
is like an integral part
of that new movement.
And on that line, I think
it's extremely important
to mention something that
the "Course" says of itself
at the beginning of
the "Teacher's Manual."
And that is that it's not
the only spiritual path.
In fact, it says
that it's only one
path among many thousands
of the universal course.
I think that that's
extremely important
to mention so that people don't
believe that the "Course" is
just another dogmatic
set of teachings,
and that we're seeing the
birth of a new church.
And Jesus in the
"Course" says also
that he's not the
only person who
has awakened from the dream, and
that he's not the only helper,
that there are dozens
and dozens and dozens.
But he is one major symbol
for us in the Western world,
and "A Course in
Miracles," I think
is a major expression of
his teachings to all of us.
>>Beyond the body, beyond the
sun and stars, past everything
you see and yet
somehow familiar,
is an arc of golden
light that stretches
as you look into a great
and shining circle.
And all the circle fills
with light before your eyes.
The edges of the
circle disappear,
and what is in it is no
longer contained at all.
The light expands and
covers everything,
extending to infinity,
forever shining,
and with no break
or limit anywhere.
Within it, everything is
joined in perfect continuity.
Nor is it possible to imagine
that anything could be outside.
For there is nowhere
that this light is not.
What is a miracle,
but this remembering?
And who is there in whom
this memory lies not?
The light in one
awakens it in all.
And when you see
it in your brother,
you are remembering
for everyone.